in the past few years there's been a bit
of an explosion when it comes to 3D
animation with 2D shading Styles and a
lot of these effects really aren't that
hard to achieve with blender as long as
you understand some key Concepts let's
check it
[Music]
out the topic of stylized rendering is
actually pretty wide there are whole
communities dedicated to
non-photorealistic rendering so I'll
narrow it down to a few Concepts there's
cell shading or flat shading outlines
and 2D elements for a more drawn look
screen tone which is common in comic
books and painterly shaders that mimic
brush strokes and if you want you can
mix and match any of these to come up
with your own style cell shading is a
concept that comes from 2D animation
when colors were painted onto sheets of
clear Celluloid it was common that they
only used solid colors with no gradients
because blending colors added a lot of
complexity to the painting
process you can see the style being used
now in the spiderverse movies
nimona and the Mitchells versus the
machines the most automatic way of doing
this to everything in your scene is by
using the compositor make sure to press
this use nodes button and then bring in
a posterized node that's literally it
you can adjust this if you want a
different amount of colors or maybe put
a brightness and contrast node at the
beginning if you think it's too dark and
you can view everything without
rendering now thanks to this viewport
setting as a little bonus here's a setup
to make everything pixelated if you're
going for a Retro Game aesthetic if you
want a little more control over the cell
shading effect then try this method
instead select an object and go to the
Shader editor make a new material and
use the Shader to RGB node this node is
responsible for most of the Magic in
this video and it only works with the
eveve render engine so make sure you're
using Eevee and not Cycles now we have a
few options first is to use a color ramp
set this to constant and now you can
move these stops around change the
colors to whatever you want and you can
add more colors too this alone will give
you a ton of options and if you don't
want it completely flat then you can
keep this set to linear or try the other
options this will work best when you
leave the color of the principled Shader
set to White otherwise your model will
tend to be really dark and give you less
control you can also try changing the
roughness or metallic to get some
different results other shaders work
with this method too and most other
videos you find about this will use a
diffuse Shader for the most accurate
colors you should set your color
management to standard I only really use
this mode for cell shading though and
depending on your lighting setup you
might notice that the colors aren't
completely flat so one way around that
is by selecting your light and in the
properties turn Shadow off the lighting
won't be as accurate like objects won't
cast Shadows onto each other but it will
be flatter you can also make the size of
your lights as small as possible and
this helps too one problem with the
color ramp is that if you want to reuse
it and turn it into a node group group
then you can't control the color or
where the stops are because it doesn't
have any inputs so if you want that then
you can use a map range node or a math
node set to greater than for the map
range node you can control how big the
transition is by changing these two
values and you can push them really
close together to make it look sharp
here's a setup that can be used for two
colors and it's just controlling the
factor of a mixed color nodee and here
is one that uses three colors and you
can make groups that use as many colors
as you want using this method for a more
in-depth look at how this works
water for a more in-depth look at how
this works you can check out the video
on my second channel the math node set
to greater than works the same way
except it will only give you sharp edges
with no gradients if you want a single
object to have a bunch of colors you can
copy this material and change the color
for each one but usually I'll use an
image to control the color instead I
made this color palette that's free to
download from gumroad and I just select
faces and move them around and scale
them in the UV Editor to change the
color what I'm showing next should work
for any image you're using though for
this group that uses three colors I'll
put the image into the middle color slot
then get a mix color node set to
multiply and plug the image into the
first color slot the second slot I'll
put a darker color like a dark blue and
now the factor will control how dark it
gets we can do that same thing for the
other color slot but set it to add and
choose a lighter color and that will
will give us
highlights I like using this method
because you can swap the main color out
with anything and it usually looks
pretty good the map range node has a few
other tricks like if you set it to
stepped linear it looks like this and
you can choose how many steps you want
all the steps will be evenly spaced so
you don't have much control but if it
looks good to you then you can use it
you can also set it to vector and Ste
linear and will actually split the
colors of your Shader into solid colors
like this so this would be a good way of
making an existing material look
cell-shaded again you don't have very
much control when using this method but
it leads to another interesting idea of
treating the red green and blue channels
of our color differently you can use a
separate color node to split the color
into three channels and if you make a
red green and blue light this lets you
do things like add rim lights that have
different colors I'll usually just use
the red channel for the main color and
for the other channels use a mixed color
node set to add or multiply to mix them
together lightning Boy Studio has a
video about this if you want to see more
the last cell shading tip is for when
you don't want to use lights you can
actually fake light Direction by using
the normal from a texture coordinate
node and a vector math node set to dot
product then change these values to
decide the light Direction like if you
want the light coming from straight up
then set the zv value to one or you can
use this normal node for a different way
to control the direction and this could
be a nice option if you want some
objects to be lit individually next is a
about making outlines but at this point
you might be wondering if I'm going to
keep talking about Vector math and using
terms like dot product well math comes
up a lot in my videos but don't worry
because there are free and easy ways to
learn about these topics like with
brilliant who is sponsoring this video
brilliant is the best way to learn math
and science because they make it
interactive and fun I just started the
creative coding course for free and it's
covering topics like conditionals and
Loops which could really help people
trying to learn geometry nodes and
blender especially with the new
simulation Zone that's B basically all
about loops but honestly you'll start
noticing how brilliant can help you in
your everyday life once you start
learning any of the stem topics they
offer and whatever your skill level
brilliant customizes content to fit your
needs you can take a quiz when you sign
up and it will match you with content at
your level and figure out what interests
you and you're watching my videos so you
probably like learning new skills and
they have thousands of lessons so
something will definitely peque your
interest it's been really easy to fit
into my busy schedule because you can
use it on your phone or computer which
means you can be learning with brilliant
pretty much anywhere and if you get
stuck there are hints and step-by-step
solutions to explain problems to you and
help you make sense of everything plus
look how slick these animations are I'm
a visual learner so these actually help
me a lot so give brilliant a try for
free for 30 days just use my link in the
description or go to brilliant.org joeyc
and the first 200 of you will get 20%
off Brilliance annual premium
subscription that's brilliant.org joyc
check it out before the offer ends
outlines are all over the place in 2D
animation and in recent movies you can
spot them in spiderverse and the bad
guys especially small details like face
lines for emphasis for the outline there
are a few options first is with a frel
node or a layer weight node either of
these outputs will work and you can put
that into a math node set to less than
this will give you a black outline that
changes width depending on the angle of
the surface you're looking at you can
either multiply this to keep it black or
you can control the factor of a mix node
and choose the colors you want it looks
nice but it's not a good option if you
want the width to be consistent another
option is what people call the inverted
hole method add a solidify modifier and
for this you'll need a second material
so add a new slot I'll name it outline
change this to emission and set the
color to Black now make sure you have
back face coling turned on and I'll
usually set Shadow mode to none as well
back in the solidify modifier we can add
some thickness flip the normals and set
the material offset to one and that
should give you an outline all of these
settings basically make it so we're only
seeing the inside faces that are created
with the solidify modifier and you can
do the same thing in Geometry nodes too
if you want to add some other effects to
it like making the outline wiggle this
works fine for a lot of models but it
gets weird with some shapes next is
using the grease pencil outline option
and this is nice because you can use it
to outline a single object a collection
or even the entire scene select an
object press shift a and under grease
pencil choose one of these three options
I'll choose object line art now this
only works when you're using a camera so
make sure you add one and that it's
pointing at your object when you're not
looking through the camera it looks
pretty broken but through the camera it
all comes together you can press n to
open this panel and use the lock camera
to view option if you want the camera to
follow wherever you look the outline is
actually a separate object and you can
select it to access the settings in the
properties you can change the thickness
material and the object it outlines
under Edge types you can change where
it's placing the lines like if you only
want the outside then you can set it to
silhouette and disable the other options
or you can outline everything you can
use an image texture to make The Strokes
look more stylized too and you can add
grease pencil modifiers like noise if
you want it to Jitter like this next is
freestyle and you can find that under
render properties just enable that and
when you render it will automatically
give you outlines
Under The View layer tab you can find
all these other options similar to how
grease pencil Works freestyle works well
but I don't really like to use it mostly
because you have to render to see the
result there's also this tool by Alan
Wyatt called the line art curve modifier
it's made with geometry nodes and it
does a really good job of emulating ink
outlines and pencil sketches there's a
link for this in the description grease
pencil is also a great way of adding 2D
animated parts to your 3D scenes like
adding lines to faces just add a bleak
Bleak just add a blank grease pencil
object with shift a go into draw mode go
to the part of your animation where you
want a crease to appear and draw a line
right here I duplicated the frame on the
timeline with shift d and moved it to
where I wanted the animation to start
then I scaled it down in edit mode and
used the ineter tool to add all the in
between frames you can also add blank
key frames in draw mode by pressing I or
you can put auto key frame on and draw
every frame if I wanted to use this
regular L I'd copy paste the frames
wherever they're needed but there are
probably easier ways to go about it I
honestly haven't worked with grease
pencil all that much I do know that you
can rig and weight paint grease pencil
just like a mesh though and this is nice
if you want permanent 2D elements to be
part of your character like for this I
just parented some Strokes to the Head
bone and the tie is parented to the body
bone next is about half tones and Screen
tones this is a common pattern you'll
see in comics where instead of solid
colors or gradients you get these little
dots that people call half tone dots
originally it was used as a way of
printing different Shades of Gray while
only using black ink and it's still used
with modern printers that create
everything by only using CMYK half tones
and in comics and manga some people use
screen tone sheets that are like
transparent stickers with different
patterns on them and they stick them on
top of drawings and cut them out with a
razor blade in 3D animation spiderverse
used this a lot as a reference to comic
book art in blender this is pretty easy
to produce again let's use the Shader to
RGB node and a math node set to greater
than now most of the variety we're
getting will come from what we plug into
the greater than node let's use a voro
node and plug the distance in get a
texture coordinate node and plug in the
camera Vector now if we turn the
randomness down set this to 2D and turn
the scale up it'll start to look pretty
similar one problem is that the dots are
white instead of black so you can flip
that around with a mix node just set
these values to one and zero you can
also adjust these values to change the
dot sizes and you can mix this with
everything else using a mix node just
like with the first outline method when
using this camera option it'll look flat
from every angle but if we zoom in then
the dots will get closer so it is still
using perspective if you want it to be
completely flat you can use the view
Vector from the camera data node and now
the dots will be the same size no matter
how far away you are this view vector
and the window Vector are pretty similar
except the window squashes the texture
when you resize the window and the
Vector doesn't do that now you can get
some cool Variations by rotating this
with a mapping node or switching the
voro out for a wave texture to get these
lines If instead you want them to change
size and Bands then you can put a color
ramp set to constant right here the
position will change the size and the
color will change where each band is
next we have painterly effects where you
can see brush strokes and you see a lot
of this in Arcane as well as mutant
Mayhem and the Star Wars Clone Wars show
I know in Arcane this was mostly done
manually with texture painting which is
a lot of work but will give you the most
control now this is a big enough topic
that it deserves its own video and once
again lightning Boy Studio has you
covered with a video about projection
painting similar to Arcane to touch on
it briefly you can start texture
painting by going into texture paint
mode and clicking this button to add a
new image for the base color and if
you're using blender 4.0 the add new
image button moved to over here if that
doesn't work then try making a new
material first you also need to make
sure your object is UV unwrapped so do
that if it isn't anyway once you add
that image you should be able to paint
directly on your model you can change
the color brush size and strength over
here and other brush options are over
here sometimes it gets laggy and I've
found that maximizing the window helps
and you can do that with control space
bar while hovering over the window you
want I got some texture brushes from
Craft Reaper on gumroad and they work
pretty well to give different patterns
that look less like the default airbrush
blender gives you but you can use
whatever images you want using the
texture options here you can get some
really nice results if you paint some
lighter and darker areas as if you're
painting the lighting directly onto the
model actually if you wanted you could
just bake the lighting directly onto the
model and then paint over that and use
those colors as a starting point I
usually use the free add-on bake lab for
baking doing this manually is a ton of
work so here's a more automatic method
with nodes make sure your model is
shaded smooth get a geometry node and
plug the normal noral into the normal
what we're going to do is change the
normal right here which is responsible
for controlling what the model looks
like when light hits it so let's put a
voronoi texture in here and make sure
the position is plugged into the normal
this is basically pixelating the normal
so it's only made of solid colors and
that makes the model look like it's only
made of flat surfaces but in a pretty
random organic way to make it look more
like brush Strokes at a noise texture
use the object coordinate get a vector
math node and we're going to add the
color to the normals for more control
subtract it by 0.5 and add another
Vector math node set to scale and that
changes the strength then change the
scale and detail to make it look more
like wet or dry brush Strokes you can
also change the voro to smooth and that
will make the flat spots blend into each
other a little more using this in
combination with other cell shading
methods can give some results that look
more like watercolor like this with the
color ramp but you could also just put
an RGB curves node or a brightness
contrast node and mess with the levels
just to change the colors a little if
you want more color variation try mixing
in this color output or you can separate
the color first and it will give you
this Grays scale value that you can use
to just make the colors lighter or
darker now if you plan on using any of
these effects for an animated character
and you don't want them to move around
like this then bake them into an image
and they should move in a more natural
way I really like this method but if you
want your results to look more like an
actual painting then you'll either want
some sort of postprocessing filter like
in my older painting video or better yet
use the the Live Paint filter tool by
Alan Wyatt it does a great job creating
realistic results and that's pretty much
it so have a play around with it and if
you want the file from this video you
can get it on patreon maybe you'll like
one of these videos next thanks for
watching and have a good one